A browser with JavaScript enabled is required for this page to operate properly. Documentation The Java™ Tutorials Home Page « Previous • Trail • Next » The Java Tutorials have been written for JDK 8. Examples and practices described in this page don't take advantage of improvements introduced in later releases. Trail: 2D Graphics This trail introduces you to the Java 2D™ API and shows you how to display and print 2D graphics in your Java programs. The trail is intended for developers who want to enrich their knowledge of the Java 2D API, as well as for beginners in computer graphics. Almost every section contains relevant examples to illustrate specific capabilities. The Java 2D API enables you to easily perform the following tasks: Draw lines, rectangles and any other geometric shape. Fill those shapes with solid colors or gradients and textures. Draw text with options for fine control over the font and rendering process. Draw images, optionally applying filtering operations. Apply operations such as compositing and transforming during any of the above rendering operations. This chapter also explains less familiar concepts such as compositing. Using 2D Graphics API to display complex charts Using image-filtering operations This chapter describes the concept of drawing on-screen and off-screen images, as well as surfaces and printer devices. This trail covers the most common uses of the Java 2D APIs and briefly describes some of the more advanced features. Overview of the Java 2D Graphics API introduces the key Java 2D concepts and describes the Java 2D rendering model. This lesson is more conceptual than other lessons of this trail, it enables you to get deep into basic notions and classes descriptions. Getting started with Graphics uses a developed example to show you how to obtain a Graphics object and use it for common graphics rendering tasks. Working with Geometry teaches you how to use APIs to draw graphic primitives and arbitrary shapes, and how to apply fancy strokes and fill styles. Working with Text APIs shows you how to effectively use text APIs, including how to create a Font object with desired attributes, measure text, and determine the names of the fonts available on your system. Working with Images explains how to create a BufferedImage object, perform image-filtering operations, and draw on an image. Printing teaches you how to render 2D graphics to a printer, print complex documents, and use Print Services. Advanced topics in Java 2D explains how to perform transformations, clip the drawing region, composite overlapping graphics, specify rendering preferences, and control rendering quality. « Previous • TOC • Next » About Oracle | Contact Us | Legal Notices | Terms of Use | Your Privacy Rights Copyright © 1995, 2017 Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Previous page: Beginning of Tutorial Next page: Overview of the Java 2D API Concepts