Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,740,370 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article One of T5's sister ships, T3 The Yugoslav torpedo boat T5 was a sea-going torpedo boat operated by the Royal Yugoslav Navy between 1921 and 1941. Originally 87 F, a 250t-class torpedo boat of the Austro-Hungarian Navy commissioned on 25 October 1915 during World War I, she was armed with two 66 mm (2.6 in) guns and four 450 mm (17.7 in) torpedo tubes. Following Austria-Hungary's defeat in 1918, 87 F was allocated to what became the Royal Yugoslav Navy, and was renamed T5. The ship was captured by the Italians during the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941. After her main armament was modernised, she served with the Royal Italian Navy under the Yugoslav designation, conducting coastal and second-line escort duties in the Adriatic Sea. Following the Italian capitulation in September 1943, the ship was returned to the Royal Yugoslav Navy-in-exile and served as T5. At the end of the war she was transferred to the new Yugoslav Navy and served as Cer, and in 1962 was broken up. (Full article...) Recently featured: Fragment of a Crucifixion Battle for Henderson Field Charles Scott (governor) Archive By email More featured articles Did you know... Kaiserin Elisabeth on 8 December 1892 ... that the Kaiser Franz Joseph I-class cruiser Kaiserin Elisabeth (pictured) accompanied Archduke Franz Ferdinand on his circumnavigation of the world between 1892 and 1893? ... that Michael Frenzel, the former CEO of European tourism group TUI, escaped from East Germany with his father when he was nine years old? ... that Masters of the Sun Vol. 1 is the first album by the Black Eyed Peas in eight years? ... that the English amateur footballer Reg Anderson was killed during World War II when his aircraft was shot down? ... that hurricane responders face hazards from floodwater such as chemical and biological contaminants, and electrocution? ... that Jean Yancey was known in Denver as "the mother of all businesswomen", having helped more than 1,000 women launch their own startups? ... that the Padule di Fucecchio massacre, in which at least 174 Italian civilians were murdered, has been described as "one of the worst Nazi atrocities in Italy"? ... that Canadian national basketball player Élodie Tessier is 3 feet 11 inches (1.19 m) tall? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Yilan train derailment A passenger train derails (pictured) in Yilan County, Taiwan, killing at least 18 people and injuring more than 170 others. Nine sugarcane farmers are shot and killed in Sagay, Philippines. The European and Japanese space agencies launch BepiColombo, two probes intended to study the planet Mercury. An estimated 700,000 people attend a People's Vote march in London, calling for a public vote on the final Brexit deal. Ongoing: Killing of Jamal Khashoggi Recent deaths: Ilie Balaci Idris Legbo Kutigi Joachim Rønneberg Zheng Xiaosong Nominate an article On this day October 25 Charge of the Light Brigade 1415 – Hundred Years' War: Henry V of England's army, consisting mostly of archers, unexpectedly defeated the numerically superior French cavalry in the Battle of Agincourt on Saint Crispin's Day. 1854 – Crimean War: Lord Cardigan led his cavalry on a disastrous assault (pictured) in the Battle of Balaclava. 1924 – The Daily Mail published the Zinoviev letter, purportedly a directive from Moscow to increase communist agitation, pushing the Conservative Party to a landslide victory in the UK general election four days later. 1950 – Korean War: The People's Volunteer Army ambushed the South Korean II Corps and elsewhere engaged the 1st Infantry Division, marking China's entry into the war. 2001 – Windows XP, one of the most popular and widely used versions of the Microsoft Windows operating system, was released for retail sale. Ya'qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar (b. 840) · Grace Banker (b. 1892) · Katy Perry (b. 1984) More anniversaries: October 24 October 25 October 26 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The A591 is a major road in the English county of Cumbria, which lies almost entirely within the Lake District national park. The road starts at a roundabout with the A590 close to Sizergh Castle and runs generally north west, bypassing the towns of Kendal and Keswick, ending on the A595 near Bothel. A 2009 poll by satellite navigation firm Garmin named the stretch of the road between Windermere and Keswick as the most popular road in Britain. The A591 was badly damaged during Storm Desmond in 2015, with part of the road washed away at Dunmail Raise, and had to be closed for five months. While it was closed a new trail for walkers, cyclists, and horseriders was built to the west of the road. Photograph: Diliff. Recently featured: Jellyfish Bézier curve Alessandro Vittoria Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,740,370 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 More than 250,000 articles: العربية Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català Čeština Esperanto Euskara فارسی 한국어 Magyar Norsk Română Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Українська More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski Български Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά English (simple form) Galego עברית Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Norsk nynorsk Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=865422981" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 This page was last edited on 23 October 2018, at 21:11 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view