A browser with JavaScript enabled is required for this page to operate properly. Documentation The Java™ Tutorials Hide TOC Full-Screen Exclusive Mode API Full-Screen Exclusive Mode Display Mode Passive vs. Active Rendering Double Buffering and Page Flipping BufferStrategy and BufferCapabilities Examples Trail: Bonus Home Page > Bonus « Previous • Trail • Next » The Java Tutorials have been written for JDK 8. Examples and practices described in this page don't take advantage of improvements introduced in later releases. Lesson: Full-Screen Exclusive Mode API by Michael Martak Do you want to use high-performance graphics in the Java development environment? Have you always wanted to program a game, but your images wouldn't move fast enough? Has your slide show program not worked properly because you had no control over the user's display resolution? If you've been asking any of these questions, then the full-screen exclusive mode API, introduced in release 1.4, may be what you're looking for. Full-Screen Exclusive Mode Full-screen exclusive mode is a powerful new feature that enables you to suspend the windowing system so that drawing can be done directly to the screen. Display Mode This section describes how to choose and set the display mode. It also discusses why you'd want to set the display mode in the first place. Passive vs. Active Rendering This section discusses the merits of passive and active rendering. For example, painting while on the main event loop using the paint method is passive, whereas rendering in your own thread is active. Active rendering tips are also listed. Double Buffering and Page Flipping This section explains double buffering and introduces page-flipping, a double buffering technique available in full-screen exclusive mode. BufferStrategy and BufferCapabilities This section covers java.awt.image.BufferStrategy, a class that allows you to draw to surfaces and components without having to know the number of buffers used or the technique used to display them. This section also reviews java.awt.BufferCapabilities, a class that can help you determine the capabilities of your graphics device. Examples This page lists several full-screen exclusive mode examples. « Previous • Trail • Next » About Oracle | Contact Us | Legal Notices | Terms of Use | Your Privacy Rights Copyright © 1995, 2017 Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Previous page: Previous Lesson Next page: Full-Screen Exclusive Mode