A browser with JavaScript enabled is required for this page to operate properly. Documentation The Java™ Tutorials Home Page « Previous • Trail • Next » The Java Tutorials have been written for JDK 8. Examples and practices described in this page don't take advantage of improvements introduced in later releases. Trail: Java Naming and Directory Interface This trail describes JNDI™ (Java Naming and Directory Interface) an API to access the directory and naming services. Here you learn about the basic naming and directory services and how to use JNDI to write simple applications to use these services. The most popular directory service LDAP is used to demostrate the use of JNDI to access the directory services. Naming and Directory Concepts Start here to get an overview of naming and directory concepts. JNDI Overview Gives you an overview of JNDI, its architecture and packaging. Software Setup Describes instructions and steps involved in setting an environment that is required to run the examples described in this trail as well as any other JNDI application. Naming and Directory Operations Describes various naming and directory operations and demonstrates them through plenty of examples that access naming/directory services using JNDI. Advanced Topics for LDAP users A specialized lesson for the LDAP users. It talks about modeling JNDI as an LDAP API, how to perform LDAP authentication, SSL and managing connections in production environments. Accessing Objects in the Directory Shows you how to integrate your application with the directory, so that you can store and retrieve Java objects to and from the directory. Features in JDK 5.0 and JDK 6 Introduces to the features in the JNDI and the LDAP Service Provider that are available in JDK 5.0 and JDK 6. Note: This tutorial trail is based on the standalone JNDI tutorial located at https://docs.oracle.com/javase/jndi/tutorial/. The standalone JNDI tutorial, last updated under Java 2 SDK, Standard Edition, v 1.4.2, provides comprehensive coverage on JNDI, but is no longer supported. This tutorial excerpts the basics from the standlone tutorial and includes features added to JNDI in the Java Platform Standard Edition 5.0 and 6 releases. The older JNDI tutorial is preserved as an archive on docs.oracle.com. « Previous • TOC • Next » About Oracle | Contact Us | Legal Notices | Terms of Use | Your Privacy Rights Copyright © 1995, 2017 Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Previous page: Beginning of Tutorial Next page: Naming and Directory Concepts