Home Skip to Content Skip to Search Oracle Menu Sign In Account Oracle Account Sign Out Account Help Oracle Account Manage your account and access personalized content. Sign In Create an account Help Cloud Account Access your cloud dashboard, manage orders, and more. Sign In Sign Up—Free Trial Country/Region Call Java Software Choosing the Right Vendor for Application Development Find out how customers feel about application development with Oracle, Amazon, and Pivotal cloud services. Read the report The ROI of Java in the Cloud Forrester Consulting analyzed the economic impact of developing and deploying applications in the cloud. See the analysis. Read the report JavaYourNext(Cloud) Java is the world’s #1 programming language. Java for Developers Java for Consumers Overview Technologies Get Started Save $400 with Early Bird pricing. Register now for Oracle Code One Contact Try It Social Sign Up We're here to help Engage a Sales Expert 1-800-633-0738 (US) Have Oracle Call You Global Contacts Find a Partner Support Directory Trial Try Oracle Cloud Start for free Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google Plus Follow Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google Plus Youtube Follow Oracle Corporate Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google Plus Youtube Oracle Social Media Directory Oracle RSS Directory Sign up by topic Subscription Center Revolutionize Application Development Is your enterprise ready? Java can reduce costs, drive innovation, and improve application services as the programming language of choice for IoT, enterprise architecture, and cloud computing. Forrester: The ROI of Java in the Cloud Cloud Essentials for Application Development (PDF) 3 Billion devices run Java—in your home, your car, and your office. Java 8 and IoT (video, 10:58) 9 Million Java developers worldwide 25+ Billion Java Cards sold In the Spotlight Special Offer Java in the Cloud Oracle Java Cloud Special Offer Develop and deploy modern business applications faster and easier using cloud services designed for developer productivity. Special Offer: Oracle Cloud for Java openclose Webcast Intelligent Bots Are Here Webcast They’re the next generation in mobile, and it’s a game changer. Watch the webcast openclose Research Report Get the Latest Insights from Your Peers Lessons from the Cloud: Develop and Deploy Apps An independent, global survey of 730 IT professionals by Longitude revealed that the cloud is critical to staying competitive. View the report openclose Topics and Trends Get Started Download Java for Developers Download Java for Consumers Start Oracle Cloud for free Contact Sales Contact Us US Sales: +1.800.633.0738 Global Contacts Support Directory Subscribe to Emails About Oracle Careers Company Information Social Responsibility Communities Downloads and Trials Java Runtime Download Java for Developers Software Downloads Try Oracle Cloud Free News and Events Acquisitions Blogs Events Newsroom Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ YouTube Oracle RSS Feed Oracle Integrated Cloud Applications & Platform Services © Oracle Site Map Terms of Use and Privacy Ad Choices